Hi,
my name is Bailey Richardson and today
I'm going to be talking about protecting
the team and what techs need to know.
These are my disclosures.
So our objectives for the talk today are
that after the talk,
you're going to be able to explain 3 core
principles of radiation safety,
apply 3 techniques to cut fluoroscopy
time,
and describe an optimal room set up for
overall radiation safety for the for the
Cath lab and IR teams.
So starting out, why does it matter?
Radiation exposure leads to a lifelong
risk.
It's dose dependent and it's cumulative.
Every time that we are exposed to
radiation,
it increases our risk of long term side
effects and complications.
And being in Cath labs and IR labs where
we're using radiation day in and day out,
we're at some of the highest risk of any
healthcare professional.
And so that's why it's very important and
we're getting a lot more attention to
this as as the years have gone on and
creating more technologies to help combat
this so that we can improve our longevity
in the Cath lab.
Kind of a background story of me,
a Cath lab nurse for over 10 years.
And I remember when I first started in
the lab didn't really understand the
importance of, of radiation safety.
Like we had a little bit of a laissez
faire kind of culture about it of, yeah,
it's there, it's important,
protect yourself, whatever, you know,
because we don't see it, we don't feel it.
So it's very easy to go about your day
and and just kind of ignore it.
And so hopefully some of the lessons I've
learned along the way I can spread to you
to help promote more safety and awareness
as far as radiation and what we can do to
protect ourselves in the Cath lab.
So ultimately why it matters is because
it leads to long term complications.
We're at increased risk for cataracts and
eye problems.
We typically see the physicians as having
the biggest risk.
They're closest to the to the radiation
and the source of it,
but that doesn't leave us not exposed to
it as well.
So in studies we've seen that
approximately 21% of nurses and techs
have radiation related lens changes in a
pacifications that lead to cataracts
later in life.
And so some of the studies have shown
like we can't really put a dose on it of
what dose exposure really increases that
risk.
It doesn't really have a lower threshold.
And so that's why we need to be very
diligent and very important to protecting
our eyes because the incidence increases
as we age.
Of course,
that that's just a natural occurrence of
aging, but when we add radiation to it,
it increases that exponentially as well
as our years worked.
You know,
Catholic people are a different breed.
Some people are Cath lab for life and we
want to be able to work as long as we can,
but not, you know,
sacrifice our bodies to do so.
So one thing that has been shown is that
once we use protective equipment to help
protectorize,
that does decrease the incidence.
And so that's why it's important to to
use the protective equipment that we have.
Second is thyroid issues.
We have an increased incidence of thyroid
nodules about 23%,
which sometimes you know may not really
lead to anything that we we feel symptoms
of.
We could have a subclinical
hypothyroidism,
but long term that increases your risk
for thyroid cancer and the need for
radiation, chemo or even a thyroidectomy,
which can affect you later in life or
even even as a as a young person.
We're increasing our our risk for that
and it could ultimately take us out of
the Cath lab.
And another issue that it seems like a
little bit more insidious or that we
don't really, you know,
reflect on radiation,
but it's the orthopedic strain because we
are wearing lead all day.
We're wearing heavy stuff that is not
very good for our body mechanics and
ergonomics,
but we have to wear our lead to protect
ourselves.
But that can lead to our orthopedic
strain.
And 60 to 62% of techs and nurses report
neck and back pain.
I mean,
I'm in my in my 30s and I already have
neck pain from, you know, one,
not having good posture,
but wearing lead all the time.
We are as Cath lab nurses and techs,
unlike the physicians,
we're in the Cath lab every day,
all day for hours on end.
We don't really have big breaks in
between, you know,
and then we take call on the weekends.
So our risk for orthopedic strain is much
higher because we're wearing these,
these protective equipment for longer
periods of time,
but also because it does cause a strain,
it can lead us to not want to use these
protective equipment.
It's easy to just say,
I'm going to run into this case real
quick, help someone out and then I'll,
I'll jet back out real quick.
It's easy to to say, oh,
I don't need to put it on like my back
hurts or whatever.
So, so just keeping that in mind,
that kind of exposes,
exposes us even further.
So as we learn about why we need to
protect ourselves because of our
increased risk of,
of strain on our bodies,
but also things that can affect us long
term and create negative health effects,
we always need to learn the three core
principles for protecting ourselves.
And while we've learned throughout this
whole symposium of,
of different sort of technology that is
emerging to help with orthopedic strain,
to help with greater protection,
we can't ignore the three core principles
of protectioning ourselves.
These should never go away and it should
always be our underlying baseline that we
go to and that is time,
distance and shielding.
So our first score principle is time.
We want to use the lowest pulse and frame
rates as possible.
We want to stay off of fluoro and cine as
much as possible, use Fluorosafe,
use our Rd.
maps,
set ourselves up for success of of
minimizing that time that we're actually
on cine or even fluoro.
Second is distance.
Very simple.
The further away you are from the source
of radiation, your dose decreases.
So you know,
sometimes some of our staff are a little
bit more mobile, like the nurses can,
can be further away, but not always the,
the physician and the,
and the scrub tech that's up at the table.
But if you have the opportunity to be
further away,
be as far away from from the source as
possible at all time,
whenever it's feasible.
And then finally,
shielding using all your personal
protective equipment,
say dress for success,
wear your lead Avron,
wear your thyroid collar,
have lead glasses that protect yourself.
And that's something that all of our
administrators,
our leadership or Cath labs should be
providing for us and should be providing
for us equipment that fits us so that
we're more likely to wear it.
And that's going to decrease our
orthopedic strain and increase our
likelihood to be wearing our protective
equipment properly.
We also want to use the Shields that are
in the room, the suspended Shields,
the table skirts, the mobile barriers,
moving those around so that we're closing
all the different gaps that we can.
Whereas if you're at the foot of the
table,
getting some extra skirts or barriers to
help protect yourselves whenever you
can't afford to be far away from the
table or put distance between yourself
and the source of radiation.
So as we go through all this,
we can use this simple safety checklist
that we use before,
during and after our procedures.
So before you want to check your lead
aprons, check your thyroid Shields,
make sure you have your glasses.
Everyone in the case has everything that
they need.
Make sure that your Shields that are
mobile are are working,
they're not damaged.
Make sure that you have a mobile shield
in the room for your nurse.
Sometimes this, you know,
we have tons of stuff in some of these
small rooms.
And so we just want to make sure that we
have room for those and make that a
priority.
Also confirm your flora settings,
your your low frame rate.
Make sure that your columnators are
working before you start the case.
2nd, it's during the case,
anticipate your operators needs so that
you can reduce your floor time of really
planning out that case saying, hey doc,
what's your plan?
Like what views do you want?
So that we can make sure that we're,
we're angulated properly,
We're in place when the physician is
ready to send a,
but also like just kind of
troubleshooting to say, hey, doc,
this is a big patient.
We're going to be using a lot more
radiation.
So can I, what can I do to decrease that?
Can I decrease my angulations or can we
decrease the amount of runs that we that
we have And really just working together
as a team to anticipate what you're going
to need so that we can reduce that
radiation.
Stand on the side of the intensifier.
Don't stand as close to stand close to
the tube.
If possible.
Step back when you're not actively
engaged.
Especially for nurses.
Sometimes as a new nurse,
I always like to be next to the table and
see what's going on and was really not
knowingly exposing myself to a lot of
ration.
So step back if you can.
If,
if you don't need to be right up there
next to where the radiation is,
step back and speak up.
If something is missing, like a shield,
or if the doctor's working and someone
walks into the room, say, hey, doc,
so and so is in the room.
Can we, can we come off fluoro real quick?
You know, or, or tell the person that,
hey, we're on fluoro.
You do step out or wait while we're not
doing that or go, go put on some lead.
You need to speak up.
Because sometimes we get so engaged in
what we're doing that we,
we don't pay attention to everyone else
in the room and making sure they're safe.
And so after the case,
we're going to make sure we're recording,
reviewing our dissimilar readings,
making sure everyone's wearing their
dissimitors, you know,
they fall off sometimes they get lost.
Make sure that everyone's wearing one in
the room and that we're recording those
and recording the amount of radiation
that's used during each case.
Really looking at that rather than just
writing down a number and going on.
Because sometimes we get high doses and
we need to stop and say, hey, let's,
let's debrief,
let's talk about why we use so much,
what we could have done differently to to
use less.
Or if we have a patient similar patient
in, you know,
in the future that's maybe big or you
have complications.
What do we need to do to decrease our
radiation?
Also sharing lessons with your team,
with your fellows.
You know,
some Cath lab staff have been around the
block.
We've been here for a while and sometimes
have,
have done some stupid stuff that's really
exposed us to radiation.
But it's really important to share those
stories like, hey,
when I was in this situation where a
patient may have been coding, I did this.
But this is what we need to do
differently.
Don't don't do as I do sometimes,
you know,
protect yourself for the long term and
always look for continuous improvement of
upon your your strategies.
Optimal room setup is very important.
This should hopefully be done beforehand
so that you have everything before you
start the case.
Making sure your mobile Shields are in
the room,
making sure that your your table Shields
are in place and also making sure you're
dressed for success.
As we said of having your glasses,
your thyroid collar,
having your lead that fits you and being
conscious of how close you are to the
table really has a a greater exposure.
So the further way you can get,
the better it is and really keeping in
mind of the people in the room and their
level of exposure as well.
So finally,
we're all about creating a culture of
safety.
We know these things.
We know why we need to protect ourselves.
We're at an increased risk for for
radiation exposure,
for long term complications, cataracts,
cancers, orthopedic strain.
We have to protect ourselves to protect
our long term career in the Cath lab,
but also for whenever we retire later in
life.
We don't want to have damaged our bodies
so bad that we can't enjoy life with our
family, with our friends.
And so make safety a part of your routine,
not an option.
It's it's an absolute of everyday.
Encourage speaking up with respectful
safety reminders of just saying, Hey, doc,
like you're on Sene.
Can you get off or you're just sitting on
Floro Because sometimes people's minds
wander and and we just need to be
respectful of like, hey,
like can you come off Floro for a second?
Or if someone walks the room and say, Hey,
can you,
can you put some lead on things like that,
just keeping each one accountable,
but doing it in a respectful way,
supporting each other,
protecting the team of telling someone,
hey, you need to let up.
Or I love the routine of before cases
start,
when the physician takes the lead and
says, hey, I'm about to start the case.
Does everyone have lead?
If you don't go get it or,
or get out or you know,
just really kind of setting that standard
of,
of you need to be letted up by care for
your safety or if,
if you're going to approach the table,
let me know and I will come off the city.
So you can do whatever it is that you
need to do with the patient and then get
back out of the way.
And our leadership and our techs have a
shared responsibility.
It's the shared responsibility of our
administration or of our physicians as
well as us individually.
And it's,
it's so important for for administrators
to know this,
for a cathode management to know this of
providing the proper equipment,
providing lead that fits us.
You know,
there should never be anyone who doesn't
have lead that fits them properly.
You know, we may not get the right color,
it may not look fun,
but it has to fit you properly.
There should be no if ands or buts about
that of providing it properly fitting
lead.
Everyone should have have that recallers
and access to lead glasses if that is
what they desired to wear.
We should also have access to lead
Shields and these are the responsibility
of everybody from the top down.
So these are things that we need to speak
up for ourselves of making sure that
those are provided for everybody.
And so finally, just rumor.
A key takeaways.
It's very, very simple.
You know,
we have all this different new technology,
but it comes down to the basics that we
have to implement every day to reduce our
exposure to radiation,
which is minimizing time,
maximizing your distance,
and using your shielding.
If you don't use any of these,
you don't use the equipment that is given
to you,
then it kind of defeats the purpose.
It has to be implemented every single day
and ultimately it's protects yourself,
it's protecting your team and protecting
your long term career of your longevity
in new Cath lab and even afterwards to
protect yourself for your family and for
your, for your work like home life and,
and everything that you want to do even
outside of the lab.
So thank you so much for the opportunity
for this presentation.
This is my contact information and thank
you so much.
Good afternoon.
It's an honor to join you at the SER 2025
to share the interventionist in
perspective on radiation protection.
In today environment.
Safeguarding our staff and patient is
just as vital as technical excellence.
I will highlight practical strategies,
shared responsibilities and evidence
based methods to ensure safety while
advancing the quality of care.
I have no disclosures.
Diagnostic imaging procedures,
with the exception of Mr.
imaging and ultrasound,
contribute more than 9090% of the
exposure to artificial radiation in the
United States.
Therefore, it is vital that patients,
visitors and hospital staff and reality
personnel receive as small radiation
exposure as possible from medical imaging
and examinations.
It is crucial to review the fundamentals
of radiation protections.
As we can see, time,
distance and shieldings are the cardinal
rules for radiation protection.
Scattered radiation, it's the real enemy.
That's how we can see.
It is the radiation that goes through the
patient and then it goes multi planes and
every,
every patient kind of made this this
radiation.
So we have to be careful when we are
around it is that's that's the the
radiation that is pretty bad for the
staff and also the medical personnel.
When we talk about distance in inverse
square law is the key.
As we double the distance the dose is
going to minimize by a factor of 4.
Those are your product.
This is what we use basically to express
the amount of radiation the patient
received through the procedure is,
is expressing sievers and it's kind of
like,
you know tracks all the accumulation of
radiation.
Those we have to be aware of Sentinel
events,
just making sure that we know the numbers
when it's higher than 50,
000 milligrays or 1500 Grays by
centimeters square,
that's like that's a central event.
So it have to be we need to be away from
from those numbers.
Absurd doors is is also an all important
concept that we should be reviewing.
It is expressing grace that is equal to
one grade and kind of like 100 rats.
So this is give you kind of like an
explanation about radiation dose are
absorbed by tissues following the
exposure to ionizing ionizing radiation.
Also those equivalent, you know,
it's kind of like comes in an importance
when we talk about radiation safety.
It's it's kind of like the product of the
assort dose and a quality factor which
takes into account the effects of
different types of radiation is 1 siever
you kind of see that is equal to 100 RAM.
It's kind of like give us a better
comparison effective dose.
It's expressed in Milliseiever and it's
it's kind of like explaining the
radiation sensitivity when it comes into
different cell types and tissue size.
It give us an explanation about the risk
of radiation effects.
Having those concepts in mind,
we can now see the comparisons between
the affected dose.
So we can have kind of like a easy
explanation,
like when we perform an X-ray,
it's kind of like 2.4 days of background.
When it goes into a chastity, it's like 2.
7 years of radiation background.
And also as you see the abdomen is 3.
2 years of background.
So it's pretty easy to to compare having
those concerts.
Occupation of those affected limits is is
is crucial to review these limits so
everybody in the room or in the lab knows
how effective your readings are.
It's,
it's crucial to know the numbers as as we
spoke about it,
especially when you have someone a female
during pregnancy,
we should take care of those numbers and
know how much radiation are they,
They're exposed.
As you see in this graph,
radiation exposure for healthcare workers
in the in the procedure room is directly
link it to patient dose,
A scatter radiation at distance of 1m.
The personnel will receive 0.
1% of the patient dose due to a scatter
radiation with a minor contribution from
X-ray leakage through the tube housing.
Also,
as you see the picture on the right side,
when you're pretty close to the tube,
that's when a major radiation exposure
happens.
So we have to be aware when performing
lateral abuse,
try to keep everyone away from that area.
How do we measure the amount of radiation
we're supposed to?
Well, basically using dosimeters.
We should always wear a dosimeter over
the lead Efron typical at the neck or the
torso level.
Usually it's only as pretty specific for
for the person,
so you should not share the dosimeter at
all.
And it's linked to your Social Security,
so it's the only way they can ensure
accurate tracking for individual creation
exposure,
practical dose reduction for patients.
We should always,
always lower the frame rates,
make sure we have a tight collimation to
a specific area and be aware of the
timing every 5 minutes.
So someone in the room should kind of
like be tracking how many minutes of
fluor you have been using.
So we we can keep that to the lowest
timing.
Also minimizing DSA runs or a scene and
how that's how it's going calf lab and
avoid like heavy angles.
That's,
that's pretty important for to keep the
radiation low.
What we can do is,
is usually making sure everybody is
wearing apron tire colour, leg glasses,
the batches for sure if you're doing DSA,
you'll see me step away, you know,
away from the patient.
So you can, you know,
be in a safe area where no radiation is
reaching to, to the personnel.
This is a survey,
this is a pretty busy slide,
but it's crucial because it shows the
different results from a survey done by
the Society of Cardiovascular and
Angiography and Interventionals.
This is this one was done in 2023 and it
shows the, the,
the average and in percentage it's,
it's pretty,
I mean those numbers are pretty high.
If you see a pregnancy 28 percent,
71% when it comes into radiation,
6% related to cancer.
When it comes to orthopedic,
those numbers are pretty high.
So we should be pretty taking care of
this 66 percent, 34 and 25.
When it comes to new technology LED free
solutions are kind of like in the
evolution.
So this I would say this in the infancy,
but there's a lot of significant
potential in this area when properly set
up for a procedure can be performed
without laps.
You know, I think that's,
that's the what we're going to see,
you know, in the future.
And also,
I know there's a few states already and
hospitals that they're using this
technology.
And I think this is, this is the future.
So this is important to adapt to these
changes.
And of course, like all new technologies,
there's pros and cons, you know,
set up time,
proper education for the staff.
But I think this,
this is where we're going.
As a summary, we can talk about, you know,
always keep your timing distance and
shielding.
Try to be aware of that.
Follow the Alara as low as possible.
Just be aware that the scatter that's
that's the why you need to be careful.
Always use the DAP those area product as
as your information for every case and we
need to adapt to the new technology.
This is what is going to make the
difference and avoiding issues in the lab.
If you have any questions,
please feel free and thank you for your
attention.
OK, welcome back everybody.
And we saved the best for last.
I think this this last round panel is
going to be fantastic.
We've got a really star standard group,
a lot of experience on this panel.
Looking forward to discussing some of the
hot topics and and really kind of bring
them down to earth,
figure out how we're going to do this,
how, how,
how can we help and make some change in
the lab.
Keep in mind you can ask questions and
hopefully we'll get those questions
during this.
They are here to answer your questions
and so you know, please, please reach out.
Those last two talks by the technologist
I thought were, were really fantastic.
They did a great job and and now we're
going to kind of bring it home with
asking some questions hopefully that
everybody really wants to know.
On the panel.
We got doctor Lakshmanarian from from
Yorkshire.
He is a interventional vascular
radiologist.
We've got Doctor Gandhi from Miami and
then conventional radiologists.
We have Doctor Pat Muck is back with us
as a chief vascular surgeon in Ohio.
Chris Steelman has joined us.
He is a assistant professor at Weber
State University and leads and guides a
lot of the technology schools and
education.
And then Dr.
Ana Saito,
who is also interventional cardiologist
in San Francisco.
Doctor her Miller is also with us as past
president of Sky and we'll also be back
tomorrow with with some of the other
panelists as well from Indianapolis.
So with that,
I really think it's going to it's going
to be really exciting to kind of figure
out what we need to do here as we kind of
move forward.
I guess one of the one of the things that
kind of keeps coming up is should we,
when we walk into a room and I don't know
what it's like in it at your place,
but but should we have a typical
radiation safety time out?
And if we have a radiation safety time
out to decide, you know,
are the people in their LED,
what part of the room can be LED free?
What part of the room can be light lead?
What kind of procedures are we doing that
require a heavier weight lead and making
all those, all those decisions?
So how do we navigate that as we move
into some of these barrier technologies
that use varying degrees of lead aprons
and, or no aprons and,
and still in the variation of not only
your position,
but but the type of procedures that
you're doing.
So open,
open that up to the panel and we can can
kind of start out there.
I'd be happy to jump in.
I heard that earlier today, Doctor,
and I was amazed that we hadn't been
doing it already.
I mean, it just makes sense.
And not not only should we be talking
about the particular challenges of the
case from that perspective, but you know,
any notes that could be provided to us
because you're right,
we're setting up the room.
And I'm speaking as a Cath lab radiologic
technologist.
We're setting up the room for you.
And so to have that information
communicated beforehand gives us a head
start.
Do we need the ramp?
Do we need this or that approach to this?
But also during that time out mentioning,
you know,
here's here's not only the challenges,
but let's remind ourselves,
we're going to keep the IR down on the
patient.
We want that table high.
We're going to optimize table geometry.
And I was a little upset I didn't think
of that.
So, yeah, I, I took plenty of doubts.
So I think it's a great idea.
Yeah, I, I think if Bob,
if I can go from the UK, that that is a,
that is a brilliant suggestion because
one of the key things we surveyed lots of
people in the UK.
So if you take orthopedic surgeons,
you know, you know,
you shift focus to other people who use
radiation,
even wearing on monitoring devices,
you know,
50% of the consultants wear on monitoring
devices, even though everyone is given 1.
And when it comes to the trainees,
it falls to 23%.
Just that idea of saying, you know,
you have a time out where you're asking
have you, have, have you,
do you have your device with you?
And Patrick might be interested in this.
You know,
80% of vascular surgeons are provided who,
who have devices end up only only about
70% of them wear it.
And when it comes to trainees in vascular
surgery,
only 30% of them end up wearing these
devices.
So just a, just a time out to say, hey,
do you have your device on?
Is, is, is a simple, but great question.
I think some of our surveys have shown
that it's, it's a bit dismal.
I'm going to kind of, you know, challenge,
you know, this is something that,
you know, we talked about a lot.
And one of the counterpoints that I've
heard from our trainees as well as,
you know,
a lot of our staff physicians is what do
I do with that information?
OK, I have the badge on.
When is that information even conveyed to
the physician?
Is it conveyed at all?
And, and when I get those numbers,
what does it mean?
And as a trainee, I've heard trainees say,
well, I don't want to miss out on cases.
So, you know, if we're going to,
if we're going to mandate that or
recommend, you know, doing that,
I didn't really need to institute
measures on #1 education #2 you know,
how if your doses are getting high to
actually, you know,
what are ways that we could actually make
them within the, you know,
appropriate range such that we're not
eliminating people from cases.
But if we just mandate people wearing
badges without actually having any
further plan,
I don't think it's very valuable.
I'll be the first to admit I was one of
those who did not wear my badge because I
didn't keep exceeding my limits,
which is a terrible, a terrible thing.
And we shouldn't be in that situation.
And I'm glad it's not happening just in
the US because the number here are just
like you were talking about is, you know,
it's probably about 70% or,
or 50% that aren't wearing their badges.
And so, you know, again, we need to,
we need to raise that level of,
of that it's safe to do it.
And you understand, like you say,
you understand what the numbers mean.
And I think real time does symmetry might
help with that as we start getting into a
little bit more active,
real time does symmetry to be so people
know what those numbers actually mean.
Yeah.
Reg, you, I can't agree enough.
I want to just challenge your numbers.
You know, here at Cincinnati,
there's six of us.
You know, there's not.
We've got 35 cardiology partners and I'm
not proud to say that all six of us don't
wear badges.
It's it's embarrassing.
So we're at 100%.
So we we've already got you beat over
here in Ohio,
but obviously it's not a laughing matter
at all.
It's it's embarrassing.
And I agree with with Repo when you got,
we need education and the Society of
Vascular Surgery is woefully behind in
this,
as we typically are when it comes to
minimally invasive, you know,
therapies and procedures and education.
We're always way behind the, the,
the IC and the IR world.
And so at least from our perspective, our,
our trainees are taking it seriously and
we're trying to put out a survey to get
data.
And I might reach out to you,
if you don't mind Ragu to get your input
to the Association of Program Directors
and Vascular surgery.
We're going to send out, you know,
a 20 question survey about all the things
you guys are all talking about to the
trainees in the country.
And I would,
I bet it's going to be very woeful the
results.
I like this.
I like the aspect honestly more than that,
you know,
wearing the radiation badge and which is
fine if we're going to educate people,
but more in terms of very basic things
that we should be doing during case of
look,
maybe you don't have some of these
advanced radiation protection systems in
your lab.
And I would venture at this point in time,
the vast majority probably do not,
but just very basic things that honestly
drive me crazy every day when I'm looking
at our our trainees.
I mean, lower the I, I use the, use the,
you know, portable shield.
Make sure you have the skirt on the table.
Just very basic things, which, you know,
if we mentioned that as a part of the
time out,
I think would be extremely valuable.
All right, Doctor Harveller.
Yeah.
But I think it's a brilliant idea to have
a time out right now.
Our time out.
Looks like we lost Doctor.
I know that.
Doctor Sedo,
you had a question or you had your hand
up.
Yeah.
So since we lost Doctor Henry, yeah,
I'll comment that we actually,
we actually tried the adding it to the
time out,
but it really needs to be actionable.
The time out is already burdened by Jayco
requirements like fire risk, site marking.
It becomes meaningless unless it's
actionable.
So I definitely agree with recall about
that.
You know, we do say that, you know,
we're all wearing our radiation badges
because that's the one thing that is
actionable and, and,
and things doesn't always happen.
But for most of our cardiac cases,
you know, we set up the Portego,
everyone's protected equally.
The rain, you know, the,
the exposure is the same because we're
all staying behind the shield.
So unless there's something different,
like there's ATE probe going in someone
there,
then I think that's where the variability
comes in.
That's when a time out is most helpful.
Otherwise it becomes a,
a burden and becomes less meaningful.
But it'd be nice upfront to know like who
is on the other side of the barrier to
say, OK,
we're going to have anesthesia up there.
We're going to have a, you know,
an echo cardiographer up there.
So again, making sure that, you know,
they're in whatever they need to be
appropriate for,
for whatever kind of shielding they have
at the head of the table as well.
Raghu, just a quick point to say,
in the UK,
you have the medical physics department
who analyzes these badges and it's
mandated that an e-mail goes out to say
ripple to say, look,
this is at the end of the month,
This is your radiation level.
And even though you don't know what the
radiation level is, it's, it's,
it's an interesting thing because I tend
to look at it from,
from my colleague and say, Hey,
why is mine double that that person's?
And then it,
it starts getting you thinking on it.
The other thing that we're working on
which kind of leads into your time out is
we're trying to look at buttonology as to
who is going to press that button.
Is that going to be the consultant who is
Ripple or is it going to be Chris as a,
as a, you know,
radiography person And the person who
presses the button actually has to kind
of take responsibility of getting the
intensifier low enough to the patient,
etcetera.
So we're trying to develop this
buttonology and try and pin down on who
is going to press that button that's
going to emit those X-rays.
And they will have to have a set guidance
of what they'll have to adhere to,
to try and reduce the amount of radiation
to the various people around the room.
We've still not developed it.
It's a work in progress.
You know, I think somebody mentioned,
you know, real time decimeters.
You know, we were looking at that.
We were for some time realizing the dose
aware system and you know,
something that you see real time on it.
I mean,
you see people like running behind the
shield,
walking away and just basic thing like,
you know,
distance from the eye eye when you
actually see, you know,
you see your level and you see everybody
else's level in the room,
that's immediately actionable.
But that's something that I think can
actually change behavior.
You can also have a wall of shame of
people who have the highest radiation
closure every month and for those who
only report monthly.
True, true.
Bella.
I think that Bella Housing,
our Co director is now with us now.
I think you had a question there for a
second.
Yeah, it was just to say sorry,
I've got IT issues going on.
It was just to add on that the monitoring
isn't designed to stop you from working.
It's more to edit what tools you have or
improve them.
So trainees should never see wearing a
badge as a potential to stop you working?
Absolutely not.
You can continue working for as long as
you want as long as you have the right
tools to reduce the scatter.
So if anything,
it's a motivational tool to make you do
the right things.
And that's really important because if
trainees go in with the mindset that this
may prevent them working rather than this
will prolong them working,
then their attitude and behavior would
change.
So it's important to send that message
out.
These tools are there to help you,
not stop you from working.
It's your actions don't stop you from
working.
So that that that's a really important
point.
The second thing with the data is as much
or as little as you want.
You can be proactive with it,
with it and obtain as much information as
you want, or you could be just as little.
Only tell me when I reach my dose.
For those that have been super vigilant
from day one.
I I don't know of any that have ever
reached anywhere close to the limits no
matter how much they've done.
So long as you follow the set protocols
you're almost behind.
Mobile lead Shields is very rare for you
to reach the dose limits.
So it's just to reassure any of the young
audience listening here not to freak out
and to continue.
The funny thing is if you compare our
work with any other industry or lead
athletes or any professional sports
people,
they would never go in without their
monitoring.
They would never compete in competitions
without having some sort of monitoring.
And I think we need to be in the same
league and mentality.
Yeah, I do you know,
you almost think that we need to take
ownership of our occupation,
that that this is an occupational risk.
We need to do whatever we possibly can to
lower that risk for, you know,
for not only ourselves, but but you know,
we owe it to our families and everyone
else that that that loves us and cares
for us.
And so I do think like you say,
I think using all the tools that are
available to change that and modify that.
I know that you say that y'all y'all
rarely reach your limit.
So I don't think that's.
The case here and we and our limits are 2
1/2 times what yours are and we're still
exceeding them in a lot,
especially in training when you know we
have fellows,
fellows are in front of us and they're,
you know,
they're done a lot of cases and they
don't really understand it.
When you do better about educating them
and and getting them to the point where
it's a,
where you know it's safe and in training
as well.
Hey, Bob, hey Bob, it's, it's her.
Sorry I fell off there.
But I was just going to say it's
interesting.
We looked at our fellows over the last
year and they have been leadless behind
barriers and they're,
they're very fastidious about being very
careful.
And we compared it to Dos symmetry five
years before,
and it was 110th without the lead
compared to the past.
And maybe they, you know,
part of it is they're even more aware.
They have to be careful because they
don't have lead on.
But pretty remarkable.
Hopefully I get published in the near
future.
Yeah.
Would you change?
I think you've changed the culture.
That is something to pay attention to.
And so how do people do that in their lab?
Because you're going to have.
I know at least in my lab, you know,
you've got some resistors or just say,
yeah, I don't care.
You know, it doesn't really bother me.
And then others that are that really want
to engage this and and and it can be
Chris,
it can be a tech that ruins the whole
thing that you're just like,
I don't want to take the extra time.
And you know, I don't.
And so then the doctor said, yeah, OK,
I'm not going to fight it.
And then you end up with a culture where
nobody cares about it.
So how do we turn that around?
How do we turn the culture?
Well,
that's just part of not only patient care,
but part of, you know,
caring for ourselves and and becoming a
standard.
Bob,
I think you've been on the head in that
if you're establishing a culture here of
protecting yourself and your staff and
and frankly,
the resistance can come from attack and
can come from a physician.
And as Cath lab leaders, you know,
we have some responsibility for setting
the stage and making it both easy to use
and then, you know,
forcing the use so that people become
used to it.
How did we become used to wearing lead
all this time?
Maybe we got a culture where it became
part of the norm.
That's what we did.
You know,
how do we get used to wearing all this
lead for all day?
Because that's what we did.
The the familiarity breeds the comfort
with working with this scattered
radiation.
And I'm dealing with this right now.
I have a new physician in my lab and I'm
deciding, you know,
when do I force him into getting him out
of his comfort zone with wearing lead and
saying, hey, we have Porteco here.
We're using it on my cases.
Your cases take twice as long.
Why don't you use it?
You know, and I'm,
I'm trying to get him accustomed to that,
but eventually I'm gonna have to pull the
trigger and say, you know what,
this is better for you,
better for the staff.
I'm going to ask you to, you know,
use this first and then abandon it only
if you tried it more, right?
I can't agree with you more.
I think it comes down to a change in
culture.
And the reality is we have to really look
at ourselves.
And if we look at the long term
consequences, not just the radiation,
but the orthopedic injuries that we all
encounter.
And I could tell you,
I've been doing this for 15-16 years and
my back hurts.
And I, you know,
I want to be able to continue to practice
that.
But you know,
so you see there is no it is very,
very clear from the data the wrong long
term orthopedic repercussions of wearing
lead.
And if we want to really like I think it
is really incumbent upon us, you know,
to protect the next generation of
physicians who are being trained.
I think we really have to take it down to
the level of training.
And, you know, as these physicians,
you know, get out of training,
this becomes this is their norm.
And, and, and,
and part and parcel of that is I think we
need to do better education for these
people.
Yeah.
Because I don't know,
I don't know there's any universal
standards amongst all the different
specialities that are represented here.
There is not.
Yeah, I don't think so either.
Do you think I know you talked about the
next generation and.
And I feel like, you know, our generation,
it's a generation before me.
I mean, they were tough as nails.
And then, you know,
I feel like our generation was a little
bit, you know, more that, you know,
this can't hurt me and you know,
bulletproof as well.
Is this new generation you feel like,
and those of you that are still training
fellows and and and residents is,
are they still that mindset?
Are they more a Wellness?
And I'd love to have it on my phone after
every case.
How much radiation I got?
Is it going to be easier or harder to get
to this next generation?
I think it'll be easier because they are
more conscious about what they can and
can't say.
I mean,
certainly when I was training you
couldn't complain that much.
You know, if you didn't have lead,
you just got on with it.
You you wear what you have or don't you
know,
there's there's no way around it was I'd
see more trainees and rightly so,
ask for appropriate LED because that's
what it should be.
So the interesting thing is for those
from surgical background,
I I trained in surgery prior to this,
There's no way you would come out without
in the exam stations, the Oscar stations,
you have the station where you had to
show how you scrubbed.
It's a basic,
but you will not get your Mrs.
yes, without having done that.
So I think you're forced into learning
even if you're that stupid and never
scrubbed your hands.
But that's almost impossible.
It should come into our culture.
Whoever works with ionizer radiation,
that that is the norm.
How do you prevent scatter?
Is part of should be part of exit exams.
It should be just normal, like nothing.
Oh, it's an extra.
It's not an extra.
It's part of the skill that you do.
Just like you have to have your hands
clean not to infect the patient or
yourself,
injure yourself with needle stick,
The same with ionizing radiation.
That's I think what I'd like to see basic
stuff implemented in that way.
Right, Chris,
I think you had your hand up next.
Yeah, just from, again,
Cath lab technologist perspective,
radiologic technologist perspective,
we're there to optimize your performance.
That's our sole job.
And we by not taking the lead and being
proactive and radiation safety,
we're not allowing you to do that.
But we should be the experts in the room,
the, the, the, the technologist.
You guys have better things to do during
a case then worry about all the variables
involved in that.
I, I, and,
and it really makes me happy that
everyone's aware of these things.
But the reason we can't do that is we
don't have the education.
You know, who,
who is standing next to you doing a case
in the cat club.
And very often they don't have the
training,
whether they're radiologic technologists
or not.
So I,
I think that's a big problem in the
culture.
But I think that empowering them,
providing education and then giving them
some ownership should be something part
of every lab.
Because as I've said,
you can be mindful of it,
but you're treating a patient, you know,
we're,
we're prepping balloons and moving sea
arms and things.
You shouldn't have to worry about us,
and unfortunately, you do.
Well,
we always think that you all know the
most because, I mean,
we certainly didn't get much training at
all.
And I think the poor nurses and, you know,
I think they get almost 0 as well.
So Doctor Sita, yeah, just quick comment.
I think every young operator thinks
they're indestructible.
This will never happen to me.
And the most powerful education you can
offer is those examples of our leaders
like Doctor Hermel are sharing the
stories of people who are debilitated
from this.
And the more we share those stories and
don't run away from them,
I think that that's the most powerful
education we can offer.
Right.
Doctor Miller?
Yeah, I think, Bob,
to your question about the new fellows
and the trainees,
they are very aware of this.
I think they they understand also that
there's a chance to get out of the lead.
I, you know, in our lab,
40% of us have had spinal surgery, right?
They see that.
They know that they're most likely going
to be out of the lab and debilitated due
to the orthopedic issues.
You know,
God forbid it's a radiation issue,
but it's much more likely to be a spinal
issue.
And, and they know that.
And now, you know,
when my fellows left last year,
they were going to go somewhere that they
had a rampart or an egg nest or a Protago
or they weren't going there or they were
going to get promised it.
I think they're very aware of it today
and there's,
there's many more options available.
So, you know,
I think it's something that we can
definitely train our, our younger people.
I think I think a bigger issue is going
to be OK.
Like you, like you just stated, you know,
these are people who want to go to labs
that have these protection systems.
But let's say you're at a lab that
doesn't have it.
How do you get your employer or how do
you get the hospital system to actually
get one of these?
It can be a little bit more challenging.
I mean,
it obviously depends on the hospital
system,
but it can be a little more challenging
than you might think.
Yeah,
I think that the the time that you have
the most powers,
like when you're coming out of fellowship,
I'll come if or if you're a more senior
person that that maybe can, you know,
wield a little bit a little bit of weight
or, you know,
unfortunately you've been injured.
You know, like me and others where,
you know,
they don't want to they don't want to
lose, you know,
one of their highest volume operators.
And so they're kind of forced into it.
But it, you know, like you say,
it shouldn't be that way.
Ragu and apologize for calling you by
your first name, but I'm going to butcher,
no disrespect.
That's the best way.
Thank you.
I was just thinking that, you know,
unfortunately, like Ripple said,
he's been doing it for 15 odd years and
then the back starts painting anything,
be it cataract,
be it musculoskeletal problems.
Unfortunately it doesn't happen on day
one.
It takes a long term and that's when I
come back to I support what Chris is
saying is I think education is the key to
to kind of highlight the fact that this
is something that's going to happen.
And then if you're a new operator, you,
you the stress of performing the
procedure,
the stress of getting it right to prove
that you're doing everything.
Then what happens is radiation gets to
the background and then it's not at the
forefront.
And that's why we were talking about the,
the,
the person who's pressing the panel
actually gets more importance.
And I am really pleased with your
suggestion, Bob, of radiation time out.
And I'm thinking that when I go back to
our, our unit in the NHS, we're, we're,
we're going to try and do it at least,
you know,
once a day in the morning before you get
started through the day so that it kind
of clicks through people's minds.
Yeah, we, we in,
in the National Health Service, it's,
it's far more difficult for economic
reasons to try and get some of those egg
nest protection or whatever you're
looking at.
But I think there are simple things that
you can do right at the beginning,
which will have long lasting effects and
outcome.
Thank you, Doctor Mugg.
Yeah.
You know, first your question, Bob,
about the younger generation.
I agree with the others without a doubt
that they already know what's going on.
They're on Twitter, Instagram, etcetera,
and they absolutely are looking at this.
I've had Med students come up to us at
the national meeting and say, Hey,
I saw what you're doing, you know,
leadless angiograms.
That's unheard of.
So I think that without a doubt that,
that, that they're going to embrace it.
The days of getting yelled at for seven
straight years like I did,
those days are over, you know, but,
but my question is you, you,
you kind of introduced us all as experts
and clearly I'm not, I'm, I'm a champion,
but you all are the experts and have the
experience.
At what point can I,
what data points do I need when I have
already techs and, and,
and our surgery residents who are doing
evars wanting to go leadless?
And I, and I told him I'm like,
I think we need our own data.
I'm not familiar if there's any data out
there, You know,
when we're going transfemoral and,
and obviously we got different obliques
for it for evars.
Is there data out there?
And if not,
what do we need to generate so that I can
be responsible and look at them and say,
Hey, Emily and Cody, it's it's cool.
Go ahead and go without your lead on this
EVAR because they're ready to do it
already.
And we have a tech.
We did a fever the other day, took,
you know,
a couple hours and Joey took his lead off
already.
But I was like, I, I think, am I wrong?
Do we need more data?
And if so,
what's your all's expert recommendations
as to to what I need to look at them and
safely say it's OK to shed the lead live
monitoring?
Go ahead.
Sorry I just interrupted.
It was just because we went through
something similar and one of the
approvals required live monitoring.
So you're dosing me tell his life,
you know,
it shows that nothing's happening.
So is there a certain threshold,
so to speak,
that you that you you all recommend?
Because we just we got that.
Bob's been nice enough to help us with
that.
And literally we're just in our infancy
in the last four weeks we started this.
Is there a certain number I can look at
and say, hey,
I think we're OK to shed the lead,
or is that still unknown for abdominal
visceral type work,
which I'm assuming that's the answer.
Yeah.
I mean, you know,
I can kind of weigh in on just at least
to start the conversation.
But I do think as we get into these newer
procedures with these more advanced
technologies #1 the more dated that you
have, the better.
And so if you can have, you know,
obviously you know,
some of the highest level of, of data,
like, you know,
randomized trials or large series or
something like that,
that you can show that data and show it
that at your facility you're,
you're reaching that,
then then I think you, you know,
in my mind that if you can say that that
clearly what I'm getting is better than
what I was getting, then then you know,
you're showing improvement.
If it's showing improvement over what you
were getting at a baseline,
then you should be able,
you should to technically be able to do
it.
Now every state's different and you have
to bring in the radiation safety officers
and,
and right now you have to get clearance.
I know that sky is working really hard
even to begin maybe at the state level to
make some changes where if you have the
data, if you're doing those procedures,
if you have real time monitoring,
if you're reaching these levels,
then then you can do it.
But I think right now it's,
it's a little bit arbitrary.
You need to talk about what is the
threshold And, and I think it, you know,
it's very,
it's very hard to say what that threshold
is because you don't know what it was.
And people aren't, you know,
we can tell you what the,
in a lot of these studies, what the,
how much radiation they were typically
getting for certain studies.
And, and if,
if a certain technology can markedly
improve on that,
then that should be an alternative to
what you were doing before.
But but again, it's got to be, you know,
we need some consensus among among all of
us to say, you know,
there there's a number or it's hard to
pick a number because you don't know what
you know,
what type of procedure you're doing or
where you're standing or whatever because
it's going to be different for,
for a lot of those.
So love to hear the panel on on how to
lower the standard location to somebody.
Yeah, I was going to say Bob, I,
I think there's really robust data for
interventional cardiology, right, radial,
femoral and and really for femoral,
although you know,
our beams up in the chest,
it's not down in the abdomen for an E bar.
And you know,
the Emory group was structural disease.
That's all femoral stuff.
And and you know,
you got a tended 100 fold reduction in
radiation.
We do need data though,
specifically for peripheral vascular and
vascular intervention.
I,
I think that's a really important certain
point.
We lack that data.
So that could be generated.
That would be I think fantastic.
Yeah,
I think it's important as we go into the
sub specialties that you have specific
sub specialty data as we, you know,
as we move forward.
And it's kind of impending on the
companies to be able to to do that
because, you know,
you don't want to just take people's word,
you know, word for it that Oh yeah,
you know,
you're probably fine with what you're
doing, but but you don't, you know,
without knowing that I think you could
put people in harm's way.
Yep.
Arnold, do you want to?
I was just going to say this.
Arnold,
you want to say anything about how do you
get the hospital to step up and pay for
things?
Yeah,
I think that's the challenge that we all
face.
I mean,
I'm working at some other hospitals,
at the VA hospital, you know.
Thank you, Mr.
Taxpayers.
You know,
we have a mandatory 10 year life
expectancy on all of our X-ray equipment.
So every 10 years I get a new X-ray
machine at $1.5 million.
So I have the Philips Allure Clarity and
it's seven years old.
I'm going to upgrade in a few years.
But then I walk into my Community
Hospital and they pulled out a 23 year
machine which is putting out all sorts of
radiation and even my University Hospital,
UC Irvine kept their machine for 15 years.
And so, you know,
granted these are high cost capital
equipment,
but the really the basic step of
radiation reduction came with
improvements in image quality and image
processing with the latest generation
imaging machines.
And so, you know,
I think that illustrates the problem that,
you know,
hospitals and hospital administrations
just want to do the minimum to pass their
minimum standards.
And, you know,
we are not empowered to change that
minimum standard,
but we can change it with our voices,
with, you know, with our feet.
Your new, your new operators,
like you said, you know,
when they're when they're coming in,
they want this.
I mean, but but you know, ultimately we,
it takes a collective effort on all of
our parts to do that.
And hopefully we're, you know,
but we're trying to,
we're trying to arm all of us with the,
with the so-called toolkit that Bob and,
and many other societies were working on
together as part of an advocacy coalition
to we can all share all these,
all this data and all the potential cost
effectiveness of these,
of these interventions.
We have something called the risk risk
register in the UK.
So when we want to replace something,
I can't see the wire.
And if I can't see the wire,
I can't do the procedure.
So that goes high on the risk register
and then you can ask for a new machine.
So I don't know if in the US you have
something like that, right?
You don't tell anybody what I'm telling
them.
That it's good anyway else I know that
you know, when you looked at the sky,
this last sky survey that was done,
it said that the biggest obstacle
obviously was cost and and forgetting
some of the some of the newer
technologies in it if it's appropriate
for the type of procedures that you do.
But what kind?
I guess one of the one of the things that
I want to bring this panel,
it sounds like and talking to to you,
many of you have used all the different
time kind of some of these new
technologies, the Rampart Egg,
Pertigo G Lift, maybe the new,
the new lead aprons, the BAT radioaction.
And so if you look at at those devices,
if you have some experience with them,
what do you see as kind of limitations
for adoption for those right now if you
take the cost out of it?
What do you see is,
is the kind of limitations for adoption
and what do you see as kind of the
limitations for certain types of
procedures maybe that you have to do some
workarounds.
I think we talked about this a little bit,
Doctor Seto.
It is what what are those workarounds?
So if our if our audience has one,
has one of these or thinking about
getting one of these,
what are the first thing that you had to
do just a little bit differently that you
learned that made it so that it worked?
Yeah, I'll just start off.
I have the OR take a machine.
We can't do a femoral angiogram with it.
So we're 95% radial and it encourages us
to go radial for the femoral portion.
You know we actually use ultrasound for
all of our access and we can actually
determine the access point by doing a
post insertion ultrasound to just see
where the wire,
make sure it's above the bifurcation,
make sure there's no obvious hematoma
forming there.
So I've actually dispensed with the
femoral angiogram in many cases and
hopefully I won't get sued over it.
So, Bob,
I would just say in terms of staff sort
of resistance to this,
I think once they are out of the lead,
there's not,
I mean the value proposition for the,
you know, Rampart, Cortego,
that's all of these is you're going to
get out of the lead.
Now if you're going to stay in the lead
and still use these,
you're going to get a lot of pushback
because they say, well, what, what,
what am I wasting my time for?
Although the time investment and setting
these up is very low,
but but I I think without shedding the
lead it's,
it's hard to bring it over the finish
line.
You know, as an intervention radiologist,
we're often doing procedures and,
you know, various parts of the body.
You know, a lot of these systems,
I haven't really, you know, it,
it doesn't really work well.
It might work well for certain procedures,
but I haven't yet found a system that
really works well for the kind of things
that we're doing throughout the body.
The radioaction system is a system that
we've looked at and it's interesting
because it's kind of dynamic radiation
protection and dedicated to a specific
area.
I think the potential limitations there
are you do it has to be built in.
It is installed into the image
intensifier.
So that might be a limitation,
but that's the only one that I've seen
that might be the most versatile.
However you do it is not entirely level
as you do where a very thin piece of lead
with that.
Yeah,
I know that you know and I think
radiology has so many different access
sites and so many different procedures.
I think for cardiology, we're relatively,
you know,
growing a radial access and certainly for
neuro it's kind of the same way.
But for these tech technology,
especially barrier technologies trying
when you're trying to work up underneath
the the I I, it becomes very difficult.
You know,
if you're doing T cars or if you're
orthopedics or you know,
some of those sub specialties.
I think it's going to be a real challenge
with the barrier technologies to be able
to to, you know,
to protect them and still be able to see
what they're doing.
Yeah.
I mean,
the other group for cardiology are the
imagers for structural heart disease.
You know,
those the TE holding the most important
instrument in the in the room.
They're getting smoked on many of these
cases.
And, you know, we've got some, you know,
made some advancements,
but they're still getting way too much
radiation.
We need to solve that.
I'm waiting for the robots.
OK.
Chris, do you have a question?
Yeah, I just wanted to share that I,
I think it's really important to do
exactly what ORSIF has done,
which is include us,
because you have to remember if,
if cardiologist is doing 250 cases a year,
we're doing 800.
So orthopedically we're at risk and we're
not standing in what position.
We're twisting, turning, moving, reaching,
stretching.
And I think that to,
to include the the technologists and the
allied support staff and in these
decisions is important in educating them.
Again, education, right.
That goes a long way in the adoption
because I know when the new technology
comes in a room, nobody wants to use it.
Why?
Because we don't know how to use it and
we're not afforded perhaps the extra time
that it takes.
You know,
you hear the Velcro in the background,
the doctors coming in, right?
And so you have to become proficient with
these these things.
And I think then combining that, that,
that,
that buy in by the allied support staff
and the training,
I think you'd see adoption rates that go
up higher because that's,
that's our barrier, right?
How do we set this thing up?
Or what does he want to use or where does
he want to put it?
Or, or she, you know,
these are their perspectives from us.
So this kind of meeting is perfect for
that, right?
We're getting us involved.
How often do your allied support staff
and, and cardiologists,
radiologists get together in a conference?
Pretty rarely.
And so that's,
that's why this meeting is so important.
And I'm, I'm eager to see more like this.
I think it's really exciting.
You know, everyone on this,
on this panel within their own meetings
have brought radiation protection into
their meetings.
And I think that's probably over the last
year and a half or so of being involved
in this has,
has really been the biggest change is
that people are now, you know,
beginning to understand enough to not be
embarrassed to ask questions and, and,
and even tell about their issues.
So, you know,
I do think that that's one of the things
that that's hopefully they're going to
drive this forward.
I do think,
especially with all the newer
technologies that are out there, you know,
I think that's only going to that's only
going to increase.
I think our numbers are only going to
improve.
It's just, you know,
we've got to kind of continue that,
continue that March.
And I think everybody, like I say,
I think everybody on on this panel is,
is brought in their meetings as part of
their meetings.
I know Cersei,
I know Bella was kind of instrumental in,
in a lot of the radiation protection
pavilion that they have Searcy and, and,
and,
and I think that's the kind of thing that
we need at most of these meetings.
You know, Doctor Monk,
as he took over his presidency, this,
this was, you know,
his platform of I'm going to bring
radiation protection to protect these
younger people.
And,
and it's going to take a more senior
voice, you know,
like Doctor Oliver Olivier on this call
to, to say that we can't, you know,
we can't go backwards anymore.
This is this has to be something that we
have pushed forward.
And I think your voice is really,
really resonate in that, you know,
change has to occur.
And I think that's the only way we're
really going to push the,
the hospital systems and those who are
cutting the checks to say that this is
just part of if we're going to do,
if we're going to do any kind of
procedures that require X-rays,
Part of that is we have to protect
everyone in the room.
And, and, and, and with,
with the newer technologies that are
available.
You have to give a Bob have to give a
shout out to Brian Chambliss.
I think he's with your company and he was,
he was very instrumental in helping us
get this across the finish line.
And you know, one thing,
like like Chris said, you know, the, the,
the, the RTS and RNS,
they're doing the least in our,
in our system four to five times the
cases I do a week.
So I went to the administrators and said,
listen, if you can make this a priority,
it's going to get out in the community.
It's going to lead to better RT and RRT
and RN retention.
And I think, you know,
because it's hard for them,
they're always looking for the dollars,
right?
The return on investment.
That's kind of not going to be probably
something we can measure here, correct?
But if you go at it with that attitude
and, and, and you know, the, the, the,
the system putting out the,
the correct message that they care,
it's going to lead to retention.
And I'm hoping that it'll also lead to
other folks coming from other systems to
want to work with us.
But again, yeah, shout out to Brian.
He he really helped us tremendously and
opened my eyes and helped me get this
across the finish line at at our
institution.
Great.
Anyone else on that?
So just just wanted to say that we were
in Barcelona for Cersei last week and one
of the things that is happening with the
annual meetings is in Cersei we had a
radiation village where all our industry
partners were together.
You could go around and you know,
chat up with virtually everyone,
look at different options because at the
end of the day you were asking for
shielding techniques and,
and the downsides of it.
You know,
we tend to sometime access the poker vein
percutaneously across the liver or some
of the complex aortic work.
I tend to do, you know,
a subclavian or anterior axillary access
so that the sheath is not long and,
and then you're extremely close to the
patient.
So that radiation village was a great
idea.
And Bella added on at the British society,
we, we have a workshop, you know, we,
we just didn't have workshop for certain
devices or certain aspects of
intervention,
but also a complete workshop on radiation
protection associated with simulators,
which kind of give you an idea of where
you're standing and how much of radiation
you get as to where you're stood next to
the machine.
So I think a great educational both from
the British Society and, and Searcy, yeah,
that's great.
These focus summits I think are really
are really helping as well.
I know Doctor Miller had it,
it's guy last year and, and,
and Doctor Spratz having one in two weeks
at his meeting in in London.
That's, you know,
choosing 5 topics to tackle and one of
those is radiation safety.
So, so we're starting to see it in the,
you know, in the society meetings and,
and looking forward to, you know,
the society consensus papers that that
hopefully will come out again,
shed more light on, on, you know,
it's time for time for change and time to
find, you know, what,
what we need to really get everybody,
get everybody protected.
Yeah.
Let me just add one thing.
And Doctor Muck mentioned something and I
heard it earlier.
You know,
I tell my students when they're being
recruited, look at their, look at their,
look at the lead.
Do you want to see how much your hospital
cares about you and how the department
just look at the lead?
And so, so when someone said, you know,
to use PPE, radiation protection,
safety equipment as a recruitment tool,
you know,
my students are looking for that.
They're going in the room where they'll
be spending, you know,
the next few years of their life.
And that that's the different,
that could be the difference between
taking a job or not taking a job,
especially as we're, we're seeing this,
this increased awareness of radiation
safety.
So there's some potential there which
I've never thought of.
So that's why I love these meetings.
Yeah.
You know, it makes me think, Bob, we've,
we've sort of done studies related to the
radiation etcetera,
but we really haven't looked at sort of
occupational quality of life, if you will.
And there's,
there's all kinds of tools to do that.
And it would be, you know,
we should do that.
And it may be another sort of lever for
hospitals to, hey,
not only are there fewer orthopedic
issues and sick days, etcetera,
but listen,
they're their occupational Wellness is
substantially better, which which does,
you know,
that translates into fewer people leaving,
less turnover,
which turns into what they care about the
money.
Yeah, retention, recruitment, obviously,
you know, we are,
we have a massive shortage here in the US
of cardiologist,
probably vascular surgeons,
really anybody doing complex,
complex work and,
and long hours and emergency work.
And, and so you're right,
if we can recruit,
if we can use it for recruiting tool and
retention tool, I think the hospitals,
you would think that that would really be
a big, a big win.
You know,
the big issue is trying to find out how
to record that data.
And I know we're trying to put together
an updated economic impact paper together.
The original one was on Orsaf and done by
Mike Seymour will be here tomorrow,
But but we need an updated one.
What does it cost when you lose a
physician, when you lose a staff member?
You know, how do you, you know,
how can you use this for recruitment?
How can it actually have a financial
impact?
Cuz that's ultimately what,
what they're going to, you know,
what they're going to look at.
And I think ultimately it helps patient
care because you don't have tired fatigue,
you know, doctors who are, you know,
who are hurting and, and,
and you just wonder if they're,
they're not making, you know,
decisions that,
that are changing their algorithms a
little bit because, you know,
they are tired and they're all ready for
the day to end.
And, you know,
you hate to put a finger on that because
you don't know what's going on in
people's heads.
But, but, but again, I think, you know,
we need, we need rested teams.
And, and the only way to do that,
I think is going to be to change
environment and in some way so that it's
a,
it's a little bit better environment to
work in.
I think we have to force this issue.
I think someone stated this earlier.
I mean, you're not going to send,
you know,
a person out on a football field without
a helmet and proper gear.
And, and this is well documented.
I mean,
I think there was a sky survey I read
about that was done a couple years ago.
You know,
like 20% or so people reported not
showing up at work because of the
orthopedic issue.
I mean, that's one in five people.
That's pretty significant.
And that's probably just scratching the
surface.
So I, I think we have to demand as,
as a special or as a group of
interventionists who do these procedures
that this is not optional,
this is mandatory.
And we can't put ourselves, you know,
we're putting ourselves and our own
health on the line in the long term by
not having proper protection.
Yeah, I know it's,
it's one of those things that, you know,
we, we like to say on, you know, I would,
I would do this, but, you know,
would we really?
And it's fascinating.
Me and Doctor Isaac did a webinar and we
asked, we polled people,
if you did not get the most updated
radiation protection in your lab,
would you walk off your job?
And, and we thought, you know,
chances of people actually saying, yeah,
if I don't get, you know,
whatever I'm demanding for radiation
protection, I'll walk off my job.
You think it'd be actually very low,
But it was 70%.
Now,
whether or not they'd really do that or
not, you know, I don't know.
But but the fact that at least in their
mind saying, yeah, I mean,
that should that's the appropriate thing
to do.
That's really the the,
the right thing to do.
And and so I do think getting, you know,
get getting a big voice of everyone in
these fields to say that that this is a
demand that we have to have and, and, and,
you know, round X-rays, you know,
certainly to me just makes sense.
Well, Bob, I hope hopefully soon,
this consensus paper,
which is multi specialty, moldy society,
every,
every specialty here is represented and
it will,
it will be a call to action and it will
not be equivocal.
And I think the other thing that's going
to come up in five years potentially is
if you work in a hospital that won't step
up and pay for these and you come down
with cervical injury, lumbar injury,
there's going to be liability and there's
going to be no way around that.
Yeah,
I think just kind of been being being in
this for a while after my injury.
You know, the question was, would it,
you know,
could we actually create change and,
and make it so that there, you know,
there is a passion for it because we're
all busy.
I mean, I think that's the thing.
And that was one of the issues that a lot
of us have is we just get busy to to
fight for something that we know we need
to fight for.
But we'd really like to just get through
our work and go home.
And and so, you know, you know,
thank the Lord for for people like,
you know,
people on this call who are really
becoming the voice of, you know,
our profession and taking the time to do
it because I know it's,
it's extra work on time of your normal
work.
And it's, you know, it's a lot.
It's easier doing things as a team,
even if not within in house team.
But like when I was asking for a lead
shield years back,
I was almost seen as a Nutter and
probably was very close,
not getting a consultant job.
Whereas now if I'd asked for it,
I don't think anybody would be looking at
me as some sort of a weirdo.
It would be the norm.
But that's a huge step that's we've come
through.
So progress is happening.
But I think unity,
having multiple colleagues,
not even necessarily within the same
trust, but even other trusts helps.
It pushes this momentum through.
So if your hospital's doing it,
the other hospital will be forced to do
it and so forth.
Whereas if it's just one site on its own
or one doctor by himself, it,
it doesn't work.
Momentum works through movement and
motion and multiple people voicing.
Even if your hospital doesn't quite get
it yet, it,
it doesn't mean that you stopped talking
about it because maybe another hospital
will then get it and so forth.
And that will help your 'cause I know on
this call a lot of you have, you know,
the passion for this space,
but do you have partners who are just
like, it's not for me And what is their,
what is their reasoning for that within
the site to me and other colleagues?
Yeah, Like, yeah, within your practice,
if you, you have the passion for it.
But I guess they don't have the passion
for it.
They, they're not really looking to,
to change.
Is it because they're just busy or
because they just don't care?
They think they're bulletproof or lack of
knowledge?
It started off so when I was a junior,
so I got the consultant or the staff job
in the same hospital I trained and when I
was a trainee I I was very psychotic
about these things.
But I love numbers and I love data and I
love my dose.
So they were like, OK,
there's something wrong with her.
Plus I was the only female around,
so that didn't help matters.
So asking for things, everyone's like,
oh for God's sake, it's not a big deal,
nothing's going to happen.
But then slowly what actually changed
things wasn't me going on about it is
because one colleague got cataracts and
he was only 42.
And then few years later another
colleague started getting blood.
Funny vision and Lord behold cataracts
again.
And that's one kind of like, oh God,
she's actually telling the truth.
She was just saying this is right.
I'm God.
And I was like, don't worry.
You don't need to say I told you so don't
worry.
I'm not going to say it,
but I think that's what it is.
It's lack of knowledge and awareness.
And because you haven't seen it,
you haven't heard of anybody having a
problem, you assume no problems exist.
But then the moment we had, you know,
these two colleagues and then another
person had some another problem and then
it becomes reality actually, oh,
people amongst my generation having
problems.
It's real.
I think it has to be a combination of
education and regulation.
And as people involved in the process,
we have to push it.
I mean at least at least the across the
pond here,
regulation will then push hospitals in
order to provide what is expected to be
provided and and that's not easy to come
in.
So if they go hand in hand,
education and regulation,
then that that will lead us to the end
result.
I feel who who regulate in over there?
Who is the regulator of your So the
regular every, every,
every hospital has a medical physics
department to look at individual doses.
As I said before,
they are emailed to the people who have
the dosage badges and they regulate.
So there has to be all the aprons will
have to be checked or cracks and stuff
like that.
And they make sure that that that is done
in a, in a constant manner.
And every year the machines are checked
to to see that the amount of radiation
that they are spitting out is,
is OK and acceptable.
So you have those step wedge filters
through which you're passing the
radiation to see how it's worth working
and models and stuff like that.
So it's a combination of that and, and,
and then the education that us as
societies and, and,
and the royal colleges and others try and
push through.
I think that's,
that's the only way to make inroads,
I feel.
Yeah,
I feel like we can learn a lot from you
because ours is very fractionated.
We have some extremely involved radiation
safety officers and,
and involved hospitals,
and then we have others that just,
you know,
that just aren't and there's not really,
again, kind of as Doctor Sedo said,
I think you have to put some teeth in
some of these things to say that if
you're going to do this, you know,
you've got to check these boxes or else
that hospital, you know, X.
And so, you know, I think it's,
I think that's what one of the things
that's important to you if you work in
our hospital that I used to work in.
And you look at the under table shielding,
you know,
it was the original shielding of what's
left of it used to go all the way down
the table.
And now there's like 3 little strands and,
you know, all torn up.
And,
and so they hadn't been replaced in the
abdominal shielding.
You know, who knows where it is?
You know, you got lost years ago and,
and nobody ever put it on.
You have Cath lab changes and personnel
that never knew that there used to be
abdominal shielding on there.
But but again, it's, you know, there's no,
there's no forcing education to say,
you know,
this is what's proper in these labs and
this is what has to be maintained.
And, and maybe it goes back to that,
that kind of time out.
But, you know,
do we have everything in the proper
position?
Trainees do have a power.
So for this is not about radiation
protection,
but trainees have the power to demand if
some center is not adequate for their
needs,
they can actually get removed and
hospitals lose funds.
If they lose trainees or you lose status
because you do not provide adequate
teaching,
you don't provide one of them would be
should be you don't provide adequate
radiation protection.
So why should we send you trainees and
pay for these trainees to be trained by
you?
So trainees have the power.
There's few sites that lost trainees
because of other stuff,
because the trainees spoke to the Deanery
and said this is not we're not having it.
And therefore trainees didn't go.
And then the hospitals were forced to
make those changes so they can get
trainees back because they lost their
status as a training site,
which is a big deal in the UK for
university teacher hospital and you lose
your status.
That's a lot of money.
Wow.
Yeah, that's teeth.
We don't know,
you know which which that may be.
You know, again,
that's maybe what it takes.
Well, that's the end of our time everyone,
thank you.
It was fantastic.
Hopefully I'll see some of you tomorrow.
You know that.
I think it just winds up a great day of
the first CERT 2025 tomorrow will start
tomorrow at 9:00 Eastern for session 5.
It's I think Bella's going to lead,
lead data protecting women in practice.
So looking forward to that and then
another round table tomorrow.
So I hope you'll join us then.
But thank you all.
Thank you.
Thanks so much.